_SIMULA goes commercial_.             (pj)asu-info:as

For almost twenty years, the Norwegian Computing Center has been involved
in the construction and distribution of implementations of SIMULA 67. The
marketing of NCC's systems has during the last ten years been carried out
mainly by NCC. Especially since the introduction of the Portable SIMULA
System (S-PORT) these activities have become a significant part of NCC
activities, and at the same time the character of the work done has shifted
from Research and Development to software production on a normal industrial
basis.

It is felt that the SIMULA work now being done does not really fit in with
NCC's general purpose as a research institution within the framework of the
Norwegian Research Council. Furthermore, the NCC infra structure does not
provide for the kind of professional marketing and support necessary to
further the spread of SIMULA.

Thus, a new company "simula a.s." has
been established with the specific aim to market, support, and further
develop the SIMULA systems. This company will start full-scale operations
on January the first, 1985, at which point it will take over all NCC
commitments regarding SIMULA. The company is formed by four NCC employees,
who have been full-time involved in the SIMULA work for several years, and
by one "outsider" who will provide the business accumen. NCC will provide
support of various forms for the company during the initial phase, and the
new company will work in close cooperation with NCC.

The company will for the time being be located on NCC's premises.


_Details of "simula a.s."_.



The company was founded on the 14th of June 1984 by Peter Jensen, \ystein
Myhre, Eileen Schreiner, and Gunnar Syrrist from the NCC, together with
Terje N{ss of the Norwegian National Institute of Technology.

In addition to the share holders, the board includes the company's lawyer
Christian Sandaker, of the firm "Str|m and Sandaker" (Oslo). Peter Jensen
is chairman of the board.

We are convinced that the SIMULA community will profit from this
establishment. In addition to give more attention to marketing and support,
the "industrialisation" will open possibilities that are closed to NCC, for
further development of SIMULA and the S-PORT system.

